licensing.md, before:

# Licensing

> Licensing can be a mess and confusing.
> This info-sheet should help understanding the licenses, but __does not__ guarantee correctness in a legal sense.
> Please read the licenses by yourself and, if needed, ask a lawyer for advice.

General info can be found here:

- https://choosealicense.com/

Don't forget to edit copied licenses-text, e.g. adding the year and your name.

## Apache 2.0

The Apache-2.0-license can be found [here][www_apache_2_license].
An example for a `NOTICE`-file can be found [here][www_apache_2_notice].

## MIT

The MIT-license can be found [here][www_mit_license].

## Apache 2.0 vs. MIT

> As already mentioned, please read the licenses by yourself and see the following description as help, not as guarantee.

While the `MIT`-license and `Apache-2.0`-license are quite similar in their basic meaning, the `Apache-2.0`-license uses much more details and describes the issue for lawyers.
This does not mean, that they are very different, but they are not identical, which slightly effects the use of code licensed under them.
Hence, the `Apache-2.0` has some extras and small restrictions compared to the `MIT`-license.

Basically, with both licenses, you are allowed to distribute, change and commercially use the code as you wish, as long as you are mentioning the original creator of it.
The main difference lays in `§4-Redistribution` and `$6-Trademarks` of the `Apache-2.0`-license.
While the `MIT`-license tries to simplify these topics, leading to more freedom, the `Apache-2.0` specifies some conditions.

- `Redistribution`: The `Apache-2.0`-license demands you mentioning changes somewhere.
  The `NOTICE`-file can be added for the `Apache-2.0` for additional comments.
  As far as I understand the license, you may use it for these changes as well.
- `Trademarks`: The `Apache-2.0`-license does not permit the usage of trademarks.

Long story short, `Apache-2.0` grants more protection to the creator and his/her work by mentioning changes and protecting trademarks, while `MIT` focusses on the redistribution of the work.

[www_apache_2_license]: https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
[www_apache_2_notice]: https://www.apache.org/licenses/example-NOTICE.txt
[www_mit_license]: https://opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php

Commit message:

Add WTFPL to licensing-notes

licensing.md, after:

# Licensing

> Licensing can be a mess and confusing.
> This info-sheet should help understanding the licenses, but __does not__ guarantee correctness in a legal sense.
> Please read the licenses by yourself and, if needed, ask a lawyer for advice.

General info can be found here:

- https://choosealicense.com/

Don't forget to edit copied licenses-text, e.g. adding the year and your name.

## Apache 2.0

The `Apache-2.0`-license can be found [here][www_apache_2_license].
An example for a `NOTICE`-file can be found [here][www_apache_2_notice].

## MIT

The `MIT`-license can be found [here][www_mit_license].

## Apache 2.0 vs. MIT

> As already mentioned, please read the licenses by yourself and see the following description as help, not as guarantee.

While the `MIT`-license and `Apache-2.0`-license are quite similar in their basic meaning, the `Apache-2.0`-license uses much more details and describes the issue for lawyers.
This does not mean, that they are very different, but they are not identical, which slightly effects the use of code licensed under them.
Hence, the `Apache-2.0` has some extras and small restrictions compared to the `MIT`-license.

Basically, with both licenses, you are allowed to distribute, change and commercially use the code as you wish, as long as you are mentioning the original creator of it.
The main difference lays in `§4-Redistribution` and `§6-Trademarks` of the `Apache-2.0`-license.
While the `MIT`-license tries to simplify these topics, leading to more freedom, the `Apache-2.0` specifies some conditions.

- `Redistribution`: The `Apache-2.0`-license demands you mentioning changes somewhere.
  The `NOTICE`-file can be added for the `Apache-2.0` for additional comments.
  As far as I understand the license, you may use it for these changes as well.
- `Trademarks`: The `Apache-2.0`-license does not permit the usage of trademarks.

Long story short, `Apache-2.0` grants more protection to the creator and his/her work by mentioning changes and protecting trademarks, while `MIT` focusses on the redistribution of the work.

## WTFPL

The `WTFPL`-license can be found [here][www_wtfpl].
It is what it's called: "You just DO WHAT THE FUCK YOU WANT TO".

[www_apache_2_license]: https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
[www_apache_2_notice]: https://www.apache.org/licenses/example-NOTICE.txt
[www_mit_license]: https://opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.php
[www_wtfpl]: http://www.wtfpl.net/about/
